Article Each Member of the International Labour Organisation for which this Convention is in force undertakes to give effect to the following provisions. Article Workers and employers, without distinction whatsoever, shall have the right to establish and, subject only to the rules of the organisation concerned, to join organisations of their own choosing without previous authorisation. Article . Workers' and employers' organisations shall have the right to draw up their constitutions and rules, to elect their representatives in full freedom, to organise their administration and activities and to formulate their programmes. The public authorities shall refrain from any interference which would restrict this right or impede the lawful exercise thereof. Article Workers' and employers' organisations shall not be liable to be dissolved or suspended by administrative authority. Article Workers' and employers' organisations shall have the right to establish and join federations and confederations and any such organisation, federation or confederation shall have the right to affiliate with international organisations of workers and employers. Article The provisions of Articles, and hereof apply to federations and confederations of workers' and employers' organisations. Article The acquisition of legal personality by workers' and employers' organisations, federations and confederations shall not be made subject to conditions of such a character as to restrict the application of the provisions of Articles, and hereof. Article . In exercising the rights provided for in this Convention workers and employers and their respective organisations, like other persons or organised collectivities, shall respect the law of the land. The law of the land shall not be such as to impair, nor shall it be so applied as to impair, the guarantees provided for in this Convention. Article . The extent to which the guarantees provided for in this Convention shall apply to the armed forces and the police shall be determined by national laws or regulations. In accordance with the principle set forth in paragraph of Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation the ratification of this Convention by any Member shall not be deemed to affect any existing law, award, custom or agreement in virtue of which members of the armed forces or the police enjoy any right guaranteed by this Convention. Article In this Convention the term organisation means any organisation of workers or of employers for furthering and defending the interests of workers or of employers. PART II. PROTECTION OF THE RIGHT TO ORGANISE Article Each Member of the International Labour Organisation for which this Convention is in force undertakes to take all necessary and appropriate measures to ensure that workers and employers may exercise freely the right to organise. PART III. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS Article .In respect of the territories referred to in Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation as amended by the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation Instrument of Amendment, other than the territories referred to in paragraphs and of the said article as so amended, each Member of the Organisation which ratifies this Convention shall communicate to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office with or as soon as possible after its ratification a declaration stating: a the territories in respect of which it undertakes that the provisions of the Convention shall be applied without modification; b the territories in respect of which it undertakes that the provisions of the Convention shall be applied subject to modifications, together with details of the said modifications; c the territories in respect of which the Convention is inapplicable and in such cases the grounds on which it is inapplicable; d the territories in respect of which it reserves its decision. The undertakings referred to in subparagraphs a and b of paragraph of this Article shall be deemed to be an integral part of the ratification and shall have the force of ratification. Any Member may at any time by a subsequent declaration cancel in whole or in part any reservations made in its original declaration in virtue of subparagraphs b, c or d of paragraph of this Article. Any Member may, at any time at which the Convention is subject to denunciation in accordance with the provisions of Article, communicate to the DirectorGeneral a declaration modifying in any other respect the terms of any former declaration and stating the present position in respect of such territories as it may specify. Article . Where the subjectmatter of this Convention is within the selfgoverning powers of any nonmetropolitan territory, the Member responsible for the international relations of that territory may, in agreement with the government of the territory, communicate to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office a declaration accepting on behalf of the territory the obligations of this Convention. A declaration accepting the obligations of this Convention may be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office: a by two or more Members of the Organisation in respect of any territory which is under their joint authority; or b by any international authority responsible for the administration of any territory, in virtue of the Charter of the United Nations or otherwise, in respect of any such territory. Declarations communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office in accordance with the preceding paragraphs of this Article shall indicate whether the provisions of the Convention will be applied in the territory concerned without modification or subject to modifications; when the declaration indicates that the provisions of the Convention will be applied subject to modifications it shall give details of the said modifications. The Member, Members or international authority concerned may at any time by a subsequent declaration renounce in whole or in part the right to have recourse to any modification indicated in any former declaration. The Member, Members or international authority concerned may, at any time at which this Convention is subject to denunciation in accordance with the provisions of Article, communicate to the DirectorGeneral a declaration modifying in any other respect the terms of any former declaration and stating the present position in respect of the application of the Convention. PART IV. FINAL PROVISIONS Article The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the International Labour Organisation whose ratifications have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve months after the date on which its ratifications has been registered. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of ten years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organisation of the registration of all ratifications, declarations and denunciations communicated to him by the Members of the Organisation. When notifying the Members of the Organisation of the registration of the second ratification communicated to him, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organisation to the date upon which the Convention will come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for registration in accordance with Article of the Charter of the United Nations full particulars of all ratifications, declarations and acts of denunciation registered by him in accordance with the provisions of the preceding articles. Article At such times as it may consider necessary the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in part. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention in whole or in part, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides: a the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force; b as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally authoritative.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organisation, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its Thirtysecond Session on June, and Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals concerning the application of the principles of the right to organise and to bargain collectively, which is the fourth item on the agenda of the session, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international Convention, adopts this first day of July of the year one thousand nine hundred and fortynine the following Convention, which may be cited as the Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, : Article . Workers shall enjoy adequate protection against acts of antiunion discrimination in respect of their employment. Such protection shall apply more particularly in respect of acts calculated to a make the employment of a worker subject to the condition that he shall not join a union or shall relinquish trade union membership; b cause the dismissal of or otherwise prejudice a worker by reason of union membership or because of participation in union activities outside working hours or, with the consent of the employer, within working hours. Article . Workers' and employers' organisations shall enjoy adequate protection against any acts of interference by each other or each other's agents or members in their establishment, functioning or administration. In particular, acts which are designed to promote the establishment of workers' organisations under the domination of employers or employers' organisations, or to support workers' organisations by financial or other means, with the object of placing such organisations under the control of employers or employers' organisations, shall be deemed to constitute acts of interference within the meaning of this Article. Article Machinery appropriate to national conditions shall be established, where necessary, for the purpose of ensuring respect for the right to organise as defined in the preceding Articles. Article Measures appropriate to national conditions shall be taken, where necessary, to encourage and promote the full development and utilisation of machinery for voluntary negotiation between employers or employers' organisations and workers' organisations, with a view to the regulation of terms and conditions of employment by means of collective agreements. Article . The extent to which the guarantees provided for in this Convention shall apply to the armed forces and the police shall be determined by national laws or regulations. In accordance with the principle set forth in paragraph of Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation the ratification of this Convention by any Member shall not be deemed to affect any existing law, award, custom or agreement in virtue of which members of the armed forces or the police enjoy any right guaranteed by this Convention. Article This Convention does not deal with the position of public servants engaged in the administration of the State, nor shall it be construed as prejudicing their rights or status in any way. Article The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the International Labour Organisation whose ratifications have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve months after the date on which its ratification has been registered. Article . Declarations communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office in accordance with paragraph of Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation shall indicate a the territories in respect of which the Member concerned undertakes that the provisions of the Convention shall be applied without modification; b the territories in respect of which it undertakes that the provisions of the Convention shall be applied subject to modifications, together with details of the said modifications; c the territories in respect of which the Convention is inapplicable and in such cases the grounds on which it is inapplicable; d the territories in respect of which it reserves its decision pending further consideration of the position. The undertakings referred to in subparagraphs a and b of paragraph of this Article shall be deemed to be an integral part of the ratification and shall have the force of ratification. Any Member may at any time by a subsequent declaration cancel in whole or in part any reservation made in its original declaration in virtue of subparagraph b, c or d of paragraph of this Article. Any Member may, at any time at which the Convention is subject to denunciation in accordance with the provisions of Article, communicate to the DirectorGeneral a declaration modifying in any other respect the terms of any former declaration and stating the present position in respect of such territories as it may specify. Article . Declarations communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office in accordance with paragraph or of Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation shall indicate whether the provisions of the Convention will be applied in the territory concerned without modification or subject to modifications; when the declaration indicates that the provisions of the Convention will be applied subject to modifications, it shall give details of the said modifications. The Member, Members or international authority concerned may at any time by a subsequent declaration renounce in whole or in part the right to have recourse to any modification indicated in any former declaration. The Member, Members or international authority concerned may, at any time at which this Convention is subject to denunciation in accordance with the provisions of Article, communicate to the DirectorGeneral a declaration modifying in any other respect the terms of any former declaration and stating the present position in respect of the application of the Convention. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of ten years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organisation of the registration of all ratifications, declarations and denunciations communicated to him by the Members of the Organisation. When notifying the Members of the Organisation of the registration of the second ratification communicated to him, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organisation to the date upon which the Convention will come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for registration in accordance with Article of the Charter of the United Nations full particulars of all ratifications, declarations and acts of denunciation registered by him in accordance with the provisions of the preceding articles. Article At such times as it may consider necessary the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in part. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention in whole or in part, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides, a the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force; b as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force, this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally authoritative.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organisation, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its Fourteenth Session on June, and Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals with regard to forced or compulsory labour, which is included in the first item on the agenda of the Session, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international Convention, adopts this twentyeighth day of June of the year one thousand nine hundred and thirty the following Convention, which may be cited as the Forced Labour Convention,, for ratification by the Members of the International Labour Organisation in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation: Article . Each Member of the International Labour Organisation which ratifies this Convention undertakes to suppress the use of forced or compulsory labour in all its forms within the shortest possible period. deleted pursuant to Article of the Protocol of to the Forced Labour Convention, . deleted pursuant to Article of the Protocol of to the Forced Labour Convention, Article . For the purposes of this Convention the term forced or compulsory labour shall mean all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself voluntarily. Nevertheless, for the purposes of this Convention, the term forced or compulsory labour shall not include a any work or service exacted in virtue of compulsory military service laws for work of a purely military character; b any work or service which forms part of the normal civic obligations of the citizens of a fully selfgoverning country; c any work or service exacted from any person as a consequence of a conviction in a court of law, provided that the said work or service is carried out under the supervision and control of a public authority and that the said person is not hired to or placed at the disposal of private individuals, companies or associations; d any work or service exacted in cases of emergency, that is to say, in the event of war or of a calamity or threatened calamity, such as fire, flood, famine, earthquake, violent epidemic or epizootic diseases, invasion by animal, insect or vegetable pests, and in general any circumstance that would endanger the existence or the wellbeing of the whole or part of the population; e minor communal services of a kind which, being performed by the members of the community in the direct interest of the said community, can therefore be considered as normal civic obligations incumbent upon the members of the community, provided that the members of the community or their direct representatives shall have the right to be consulted in regard to the need for such services. Articles to deleted pursuant to Article of the Protocol of to the Forced Labour Convention, Article The illegal exaction of forced or compulsory labour shall be punishable as a penal offence, and it shall be an obligation on any Member ratifying this Convention to ensure that the penalties imposed by law are really adequate and are strictly enforced. Article . Each Member of the International Labour Organisation which ratifies this Convention undertakes to apply it to the territories placed under its sovereignty, jurisdiction, protection, suzerainty, tutelage or authority, so far as it has the right to accept obligations affecting matters of internal jurisdiction; provided that, if such Member may desire to take advantage of the provisions of article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation, it shall append to its ratification a declaration stating the territories to which it intends to apply the provisions of this Convention without modification; the territories to which it intends to apply the provisions of this Convention with modifications, together with details of the said modifications; the territories in respect of which it reserves its decision. The aforesaid declaration shall be deemed to be an integral part of the ratification and shall have the force of ratification. It shall be open to any Member, by a subsequent declaration, to cancel in whole or in part the reservations made, in pursuance of the provisions of subparagraphs and of this Article, in the original declaration. Article The formal ratifications of this Convention under the conditions set forth in the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members whose ratifications have been registered with the International Labour Office. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members of the International Labour Organisation have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve months after the date on which the ratification has been registered. Article As soon as the ratifications of two Members of the International Labour Organisation have been registered with the International Labour Office, the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall so notify all the Members of the International Labour Organisation. He shall likewise notify them of the registration of ratifications which may be communicated subsequently by other Members of the Organisation. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered with the International Labour Office. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of five years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of five years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article At such times as it may consider necessary the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in part. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention in whole or in part, the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve denunciation of this Convention without any requirement of delay, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force. As from the date of the coming into force of the new revising Convention, the present Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. Nevertheless, this Convention shall remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising convention. Article The French and English texts of this Convention shall both be authentic.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organisation, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its Fortieth Session on June, and Having considered the question of forced labour, which is the fourth item on the agenda of the session, and Having noted the provisions of the Forced Labour Convention,, and Having noted that the Slavery Convention,, provides that all necessary measures shall be taken to prevent compulsory or forced labour from developing into conditions analogous to slavery and that the Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery,, provides for the complete abolition of debt bondage and serfdom, and Having noted that the Protection of Wages Convention,, provides that wages shall be paid regularly and prohibits methods of payment which deprive the worker of a genuine possibility of terminating his employment, and Having decided upon the adoption of further proposals with regard to the abolition of certain forms of forced or compulsory labour constituting a violation of the rights of man referred to in the Charter of the United Nations and enunciated by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international Convention, adopts this twentyfifth day of June of the year one thousand nine hundred and fiftyseven the following Convention, which may be cited as the Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, : Article Each Member of the International Labour Organisation which ratifies this Convention undertakes to suppress and not to make use of any form of forced or compulsory labour a as a means of political coercion or education or as a punishment for holding or expressing political views or views ideologically opposed to the established political, social or economic system; b as a method of mobilising and using labour for purposes of economic development; c as a means of labour discipline; d as a punishment for having participated in strikes; e as a means of racial, social, national or religious discrimination. Article Each Member of the International Labour Organisation which ratifies this Convention undertakes to take effective measures to secure the immediate and complete abolition of forced or compulsory labour as specified in Article of this Convention. Article The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the International Labour Organisation whose ratifications have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve months after the date on which its ratification has been registered. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of ten years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organisation of the registration of all ratifications and denunciations communicated to him by the Members of the Organisation. When notifying the Members of the Organisation of the registration of the second ratification communicated to him, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organisation to the date upon which the Convention will come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for registration in accordance with Article of the Charter of the United Nations full particulars of all ratifications and acts of denunciation registered by him in accordance with the provisions of the preceding Articles. Article At such times as it may consider necessary the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in part. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention in whole or in part, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides: a the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force; b as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally authoritative.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organisation, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its Fiftyeighth Session on June, and Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals with regard to minimum age for admission to employment, which is the fourth item on the agenda of the session, and Noting the terms of the Minimum Age Industry Convention,, the Minimum Age Sea Convention,, the Minimum Age Agriculture Convention,, the Minimum Age Trimmers and Stokers Convention,, the Minimum Age NonIndustrial Employment Convention,, the Minimum Age Sea Convention Revised,, the Minimum Age Industry Convention Revised,, the Minimum Age NonIndustrial Employment Convention Revised,, the Minimum Age Fishermen Convention,, and the Minimum Age Underground Work Convention,, and Considering that the time has come to establish a general instrument on the subject, which would gradually replace the existing ones applicable to limited economic sectors, with a view to achieving the total abolition of child labour, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international Convention, adopts this twentysixth day of June of the year one thousand nine hundred and seventythree the following Convention, which may be cited as the Minimum Age Convention, : Article Each Member for which this Convention is in force undertakes to pursue a national policy designed to ensure the effective abolition of child labour and to raise progressively the minimum age for admission to employment or work to a level consistent with the fullest physical and mental development of young persons. Article . Each Member which ratifies this Convention shall specify, in a declaration appended to its ratification, a minimum age for admission to employment or work within its territory and on means of transport registered in its territory; subject to Articles to of this Convention, no one under that age shall be admitted to employment or work in any occupation. Each Member which has ratified this Convention may subsequently notify the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office, by further declarations, that it specifies a minimum age higher than that previously specified. The minimum age specified in pursuance of paragraph of this Article shall not be less than the age of completion of compulsory schooling and, in any case, shall not be less than years. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph of this Article, a Member whose economy and educational facilities are insufficiently developed may, after consultation with the organisations of employers and workers concerned, where such exist, initially specify a minimum age of years. Each Member which has specified a minimum age of years in pursuance of the provisions of the preceding paragraph shall include in its reports on the application of this Convention submitted under article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation a statement a that its reason for doing so subsists; or b that it renounces its right to avail itself of the provisions in question as from a stated date. Article . The minimum age for admission to any type of employment or work which by its nature or the circumstances in which it is carried out is likely to jeopardise the health, safety or morals of young persons shall not be less than years. The types of employment or work to which paragraph of this Article applies shall be determined by national laws or regulations or by the competent authority, after consultation with the organisations of employers and workers concerned, where such exist. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph of this Article, national laws or regulations or the competent authority may, after consultation with the organisations of employers and workers concerned, where such exist, authorise employment or work as from the age of years on condition that the health, safety and morals of the young persons concerned are fully protected and that the young persons have received adequate specific instruction or vocational training in the relevant branch of activity. Article . In so far as necessary, the competent authority, after consultation with the organisations of employers and workers concerned, where such exist, may exclude from the application of this Convention limited categories of employment or work in respect of which special and substantial problems of application arise. Each Member which ratifies this Convention shall list in its first report on the application of the Convention submitted under article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation any categories which may have been excluded in pursuance of paragraph of this Article, giving the reasons for such exclusion, and shall state in subsequent reports the position of its law and practice in respect of the categories excluded and the extent to which effect has been given or is proposed to be given to the Convention in respect of such categories. Employment or work covered by Article of this Convention shall not be excluded from the application of the Convention in pursuance of this Article. Article . A Member whose economy and administrative facilities are insufficiently developed may, after consultation with the organisations of employers and workers concerned, where such exist, initially limit the scope of application of this Convention. Each Member which avails itself of the provisions of paragraph of this Article shall specify, in a declaration appended to its ratification, the branches of economic activity or types of undertakings to which it will apply the provisions of the Convention. The provisions of the Convention shall be applicable as a minimum to the following: mining and quarrying; manufacturing; construction; electricity, gas and water; sanitary services; transport, storage and communication; and plantations and other agricultural undertakings mainly producing for commercial purposes, but excluding family and smallscale holdings producing for local consumption and not regularly employing hired workers. Any Member which has limited the scope of application of this Convention in pursuance of this Article a shall indicate in its reports under Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation the general position as regards the employment or work of young persons and children in the branches of activity which are excluded from the scope of application of this Convention and any progress which may have been made towards wider application of the provisions of the Convention; b may at any time formally extend the scope of application by a declaration addressed to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office. Article This Convention does not apply to work done by children and young persons in schools for general, vocational or technical education or in other training institutions, or to work done by persons at least years of age in undertakings, where such work is carried out in accordance with conditions prescribed by the competent authority, after consultation with the organisations of employers and workers concerned, where such exist, and is an integral part of a a course of education or training for which a school or training institution is primarily responsible; b a programme of training mainly or entirely in an undertaking, which programme has been approved by the competent authority; or c a programme of guidance or orientation designed to facilitate the choice of an occupation or of a line of training. Article . National laws or regulations may permit the employment or work of persons to years of age on light work which is a not likely to be harmful to their health or development; and b not such as to prejudice their attendance at school, their participation in vocational orientation or training programmes approved by the competent authority or their capacity to benefit from the instruction received. National laws or regulations may also permit the employment or work of persons who are at least years of age but have not yet completed their compulsory schooling on work which meets the requirements set forth in subparagraphs a and b of paragraph of this Article. The competent authority shall determine the activities in which employment or work may be permitted under paragraphs and of this Article and shall prescribe the number of hours during which and the conditions in which such employment or work may be undertaken. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs and of this Article, a Member which has availed itself of the provisions of paragraph of Article may, for as long as it continues to do so, substitute the ages and for the ages and in paragraph and the age for the age in paragraph of this Article. Article . After consultation with the organisations of employers and workers concerned, where such exist, the competent authority may, by permits granted in individual cases, allow exceptions to the prohibition of employment or work provided for in Article of this Convention, for such purposes as participation in artistic performances. Permits so granted shall limit the number of hours during which and prescribe the conditions in which employment or work is allowed. Article . All necessary measures, including the provision of appropriate penalties, shall be taken by the competent authority to ensure the effective enforcement of the provisions of this Convention. National laws or regulations or the competent authority shall define the persons responsible for compliance with the provisions giving effect to the Convention. National laws or regulations or the competent authority shall prescribe the registers or other documents which shall be kept and made available by the employer; such registers or documents shall contain the names and ages or dates of birth, duly certified wherever possible, of persons whom he employs or who work for him and who are less than years of age. Article . This Convention revises, on the terms set forth in this Article, the Minimum Age Industry Convention,, the Minimum Age Sea Convention,, the Minimum Age Agriculture Convention,, the Minimum Age Trimmers and Stokers Convention,, the Minimum Age NonIndustrial Employment Convention,, the Minimum Age Sea Convention Revised,, the Minimum Age Industry Convention Revised,, the Minimum Age NonIndustrial Employment Convention Revised,, the Minimum Age Fishermen Convention,, and the Minimum Age Underground Work Convention,. The coming into force of this Convention shall not close the Minimum Age Sea Convention Revised,, the Minimum Age Industry Convention Revised,, the Minimum Age NonIndustrial Employment Convention Revised,, the Minimum Age Fishermen Convention,, or the Minimum Age Underground Work Convention,, to further ratification. The Minimum Age Industry Convention,, the Minimum Age Sea Convention,, the Minimum Age Agriculture Convention,, and the Minimum Age Trimmers and Stokers Convention,, shall be closed to further ratification when all the parties thereto have consented to such closing by ratification of this Convention or by a declaration communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office. When the obligations of this Convention are accepted a by a Member which is a party to the Minimum Age Industry Convention Revised,, and a minimum age of not less than years is specified in pursuance of Article of this Convention, this shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of that Convention, b in respect of nonindustrial employment as defined in the Minimum Age NonIndustrial Employment Convention,, by a Member which is a party to that Convention, this shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of that Convention, c in respect of nonindustrial employment as defined in the Minimum Age NonIndustrial Employment Convention Revised,, by a Member which is a party to that Convention, and a minimum age of not less than years is specified in pursuance of Article of this Convention, this shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of that Convention, d in respect of maritime employment, by a Member which is a party to the Minimum Age Sea Convention Revised,, and a minimum age of not less than years is specified in pursuance of Article of this Convention or the Member specifies that Article of this Convention applies to maritime employment, this shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of that Convention, e in respect of employment in maritime fishing, by a Member which is a party to the Minimum Age Fishermen Convention,, and a minimum age of not less than years is specified in pursuance of Article of this Convention or the Member specifies that Article of this Convention applies to employment in maritime fishing, this shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of that Convention, f by a Member which is a party to the Minimum Age Underground Work Convention,, and a minimum age of not less than the age specified in pursuance of that Convention is specified in pursuance of Article of this Convention or the Member specifies that such an age applies to employment underground in mines in virtue of Article of this Convention, this shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of that Convention, if and when this Convention shall have come into force. Acceptance of the obligations of this Convention a shall involve the denunciation of the Minimum Age Industry Convention,, in accordance with Article thereof, b in respect of agriculture shall involve the denunciation of the Minimum Age Agriculture Convention,, in accordance with Article thereof, c in respect of maritime employment shall involve the denunciation of the Minimum Age Sea Convention,, in accordance with Article thereof, and of the Minimum Age Trimmers and Stokers Convention,, in accordance with Article thereof, if and when this Convention shall have come into force. Article The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the International Labour Organisation whose ratifications have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve months after the date on which its ratifications has been registered. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of ten years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organisation of the registration of all ratifications and denunciations communicated to him by the Members of the Organisation. When notifying the Members of the Organisation of the registration of the second ratification communicated to him, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organisation to the date upon which the Convention will come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for registration in accordance with Article of the Charter of the United Nations full particulars of all ratifications and acts of denunciation registered by him in accordance with the provisions of the preceding Articles. Article At such times as it may consider necessary the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in part. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention in whole or in part, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides: a the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force; b as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally authoritative.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organization, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its th Session on June, and Considering the need to adopt new instruments for the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour, as the main priority for national and international action, including international cooperation and assistance, to complement the Convention and the Recommendation concerning Minimum Age for Admission to Employment,, which remain fundamental instruments on child labour, and Considering that the effective elimination of the worst forms of child labour requires immediate and comprehensive action, taking into account the importance of free basic education and the need to remove the children concerned from all such work and to provide for their rehabilitation and social integration while addressing the needs of their families, and Recalling the resolution concerning the elimination of child labour adopted by the International Labour Conference at its rd Session in, and Recognizing that child labour is to a great extent caused by poverty and that the longterm solution lies in sustained economic growth leading to social progress, in particular poverty alleviation and universal education, and Recalling the Convention on the Rights of the Child adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on November, and Recalling the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its Followup, adopted by the International Labour Conference at its th Session in, and Recalling that some of the worst forms of child labour are covered by other international instruments, in particular the Forced Labour Convention,, and the United Nations Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery,, and Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals with regard to child labour, which is the fourth item on the agenda of the session, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international Convention; adopts this seventeenth day of June of the year one thousand nine hundred and ninetynine the following Convention, which may be cited as the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention,. Article Each Member which ratifies this Convention shall take immediate and effective measures to secure the prohibition and elimination of the worst forms of child labour as a matter of urgency. Article For the purposes of this Convention, the term child shall apply to all persons under the age of. Article For the purposes of this Convention, the term the worst forms of child labour comprises: a all forms of slavery or practices similar to slavery, such as the sale and trafficking of children, debt bondage and serfdom and forced or compulsory labour, including forced or compulsory recruitment of children for use in armed conflict; b the use, procuring or offering of a child for prostitution, for the production of pornography or for pornographic performances; c the use, procuring or offering of a child for illicit activities, in particular for the production and trafficking of drugs as defined in the relevant international treaties; d work which, by its nature or the circumstances in which it is carried out, is likely to harm the health, safety or morals of children. Article . The types of work referred to under Article d shall be determined by national laws or regulations or by the competent authority, after consultation with the organizations of employers and workers concerned, taking into consideration relevant international standards, in particular Paragraphs and of the Worst Forms of Child Labour Recommendation,. The competent authority, after consultation with the organizations of employers and workers concerned, shall identify where the types of work so determined exist. The list of the types of work determined under paragraph of this Article shall be periodically examined and revised as necessary, in consultation with the organizations of employers and workers concerned. Article Each Member shall, after consultation with employers' and workers' organizations, establish or designate appropriate mechanisms to monitor the implementation of the provisions giving effect to this Convention. Article . Each Member shall design and implement programmes of action to eliminate as a priority the worst forms of child labour. Such programmes of action shall be designed and implemented in consultation with relevant government institutions and employers' and workers' organizations, taking into consideration the views of other concerned groups as appropriate. Article . Each Member shall take all necessary measures to ensure the effective implementation and enforcement of the provisions giving effect to this Convention including the provision and application of penal sanctions or, as appropriate, other sanctions. Each Member shall, taking into account the importance of education in eliminating child labour, take effective and timebound measures to: a prevent the engagement of children in the worst forms of child labour; b provide the necessary and appropriate direct assistance for the removal of children from the worst forms of child labour and for their rehabilitation and social integration; c ensure access to free basic education, and, wherever possible and appropriate, vocational training, for all children removed from the worst forms of child labour; d identify and reach out to children at special risk; and e take account of the special situation of girls. Each Member shall designate the competent authority responsible for the implementation of the provisions giving effect to this Convention. Article Members shall take appropriate steps to assist one another in giving effect to the provisions of this Convention through enhanced international cooperation andor assistance including support for social and economic development, poverty eradication programmes and universal education. Article The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the International Labour Organization whose ratifications have been registered with the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office. It shall come into force months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member months after the date on which its ratification has been registered. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of ten years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organization of the registration of all ratifications and acts of denunciation communicated by the Members of the Organization. When notifying the Members of the Organization of the registration of the second ratification, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organization to the date upon which the Convention shall come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, for registration in accordance with article of the Charter of the United Nations, full particulars of all ratifications and acts of denunciation registered by the DirectorGeneral in accordance with the provisions of the preceding Articles. Article At such times as it may consider necessary, the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in part. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention in whole or in part, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides a the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force; b as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force, this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally authoritative.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organisation, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its Thirtyfourth Session on June, and Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals with regard to the principle of equal remuneration for men and women workers for work of equal value, which is the seventh item on the agenda of the session, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international Convention, adopts this twentyninth day of June of the year one thousand nine hundred and fiftyone the following Convention, which may be cited as the Equal Remuneration Convention, : Article For the purpose of this Convention a the term remuneration includes the ordinary, basic or minimum wage or salary and any additional emoluments whatsoever payable directly or indirectly, whether in cash or in kind, by the employer to the worker and arising out of the worker's employment; b the term equal remuneration for men and women workers for work of equal value refers to rates of remuneration established without discrimination based on sex. Article . Each Member shall, by means appropriate to the methods in operation for determining rates of remuneration, promote and, in so far as is consistent with such methods, ensure the application to all workers of the principle of equal remuneration for men and women workers for work of equal value. This principle may be applied by means of a national laws or regulations; b legally established or recognised machinery for wage determination; c collective agreements between employers and workers; or d a combination of these various means. Article . Where such action will assist in giving effect to the provisions of this Convention measures shall be taken to promote objective appraisal of jobs on the basis of the work to be performed. The methods to be followed in this appraisal may be decided upon by the authorities responsible for the determination of rates of remuneration, or, where such rates are determined by collective agreements, by the parties thereto. Differential rates between workers which correspond, without regard to sex, to differences, as determined by such objective appraisal, in the work to be performed shall not be considered as being contrary to the principle of equal remuneration for men and women workers for work of equal value. Article Each Member shall cooperate as appropriate with the employers' and workers' organisations concerned for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Convention. Article The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the International Labour Organisation whose ratifications have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve months after the date on which its ratification has been registered. Article . Declarations communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office in accordance with paragraph of Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation shall indicate a the territories in respect of which the Member concerned undertakes that the provisions of the Convention shall be applied without modification; b the territories in respect of which it undertakes that the provisions of the Convention shall be applied subject to modifications, together with details of the said modifications; c the territories in respect of which the Convention is inapplicable and in such cases the grounds on which it is inapplicable; d the territories in respect of which it reserves its decision pending further consideration of the position. The undertakings referred to in subparagraphs a and b of paragraph of this Article shall be deemed to be an integral part of the ratification and shall have the force of ratification. Any Member may at any time by a subsequent declaration cancel in whole or in part any reservation made in its original declaration in virtue of subparagraph b, c or d of paragraph of this Article. Any Member may, at any time at which the Convention is subject to denunciation in accordance with the provisions of Article, communicate to the DirectorGeneral a declaration modifying in any other respect the terms of any former declaration and stating the present position in respect of such territories as it may specify. Article . Declarations communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office in accordance with paragraph or of Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation shall indicate whether the provisions of the Convention will be applied in the territory concerned without modification or subject to modifications; when the declaration indicates that the provisions of the Convention will be applied subject to modifications, it shall give details of the said modifications. The Member, Members or international authority concerned may at any time by a subsequent declaration renounce in whole or in part the right to have recourse to any modification indicated in any former declaration. The Member, Members or international authority concerned may, at any time at which this Convention is subject to denunciation in accordance with the provisions of Article, communicate to the DirectorGeneral a declaration modifying in any other respect the terms of any former declaration and stating the present position in respect of the application of the Convention. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of ten years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organisation of the registration of all ratifications, declarations and denunciations communicated to him by the Members of the Organisation. When notifying the Members of the Organisation of the registration of the second ratification communicated to him, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organisation to the date upon which the Convention will come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for registration in accordance with Article of the Charter of the United Nations full particulars of all ratifications, declarations and acts of denunciation registered by him in accordance with the provisions of the preceding articles. Article At such times as may consider necessary the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in part. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention in whole or in part, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides a the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force; b as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally authoritative.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organisation, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its Fortysecond Session on June, and Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals with regard to discrimination in the field of employment and occupation, which is the fourth item on the agenda of the session, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international Convention, and Considering that the Declaration of Philadelphia affirms that all human beings, irrespective of race, creed or sex, have the right to pursue both their material wellbeing and their spiritual development in conditions of freedom and dignity, of economic security and equal opportunity, and Considering further that discrimination constitutes a violation of rights enunciated by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopts this twentyfifth day of June of the year one thousand nine hundred and fiftyeight the following Convention, which may be cited as the Discrimination Employment and Occupation Convention, : Article . For the purpose of this Convention the term discrimination includes a any distinction, exclusion or preference made on the basis of race, colour, sex, religion, political opinion, national extraction or social origin, which has the effect of nullifying or impairing equality of opportunity or treatment in employment or occupation; b such other distinction, exclusion or preference which has the effect of nullifying or impairing equality of opportunity or treatment in employment or occupation as may be determined by the Member concerned after consultation with representative employers' and workers' organisations, where such exist, and with other appropriate bodies. Any distinction, exclusion or preference in respect of a particular job based on the inherent requirements thereof shall not be deemed to be discrimination. For the purpose of this Convention the terms employment and occupation include access to vocational training, access to employment and to particular occupations, and terms and conditions of employment. Article Each Member for which this Convention is in force undertakes to declare and pursue a national policy designed to promote, by methods appropriate to national conditions and practice, equality of opportunity and treatment in respect of employment and occupation, with a view to eliminating any discrimination in respect thereof. Article Each Member for which this Convention is in force undertakes, by methods appropriate to national conditions and practice a to seek the cooperation of employers' and workers' organisations and other appropriate bodies in promoting the acceptance and observance of this policy; b to enact such legislation and to promote such educational programmes as may be calculated to secure the acceptance and observance of the policy; c to repeal any statutory provisions and modify any administrative instructions or practices which are inconsistent with the policy; d to pursue the policy in respect of employment under the direct control of a national authority; e to ensure observance of the policy in the activities of vocational guidance, vocational training and placement services under the direction of a national authority; f to indicate in its annual reports on the application of the Convention the action taken in pursuance of the policy and the results secured by such action. Article Any measures affecting an individual who is justifiably suspected of, or engaged in, activities prejudicial to the security of the State shall not be deemed to be discrimination, provided that the individual concerned shall have the right to appeal to a competent body established in accordance with national practice. Article . Special measures of protection or assistance provided for in other Conventions or Recommendations adopted by the International Labour Conference shall not be deemed to be discrimination. Any Member may, after consultation with representative employers' and workers' organisations, where such exist, determine that other special measures designed to meet the particular requirements of persons who, for reasons such as sex, age, disablement, family responsibilities or social or cultural status, are generally recognised to require special protection or assistance, shall not be deemed to be discrimination. Article Each Member which ratifies this Convention undertakes to apply it to nonmetropolitan territories in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation. Article The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the International Labour Organisation whose ratifications have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve months after the date on which its ratification has been registered. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of ten years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organisation of the registration of all ratifications and denunciations communicated to him by the Members of the Organisation. When notifying the Members of the Organisation of the registration of the second ratification communicated to him, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organisation to the date upon which the Convention will come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for registration in accordance with Article of the Charter of the United Nations full particulars of all ratifications and acts of denunciation registered by him in accordance with the provisions of the preceding Articles. Article At such times as it may consider necessary the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in part. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention in whole or in part, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides: a the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force; b as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force, this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally authoritative.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organisation, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its Sixtyseventh Session on June, and Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals with regard to safety and health and the working environment, which is the sixth item on the agenda of the session, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international Convention, adopts this twentysecond day of June of the year one thousand nine hundred and eightyone the following Convention, which may be cited as the Occupational Safety and Health Convention, : PART I. SCOPE AND DEFINITIONS Article . This Convention applies to all branches of economic activity. A Member ratifying this Convention may, after consultation at the earliest possible stage with the representative organisations of employers and workers concerned, exclude from its application, in part or in whole, particular branches of economic activity, such as maritime shipping or fishing, in respect of which special problems of a substantial nature arise. Each Member which ratifies this Convention shall list, in the first report on the application of the Convention submitted under Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation, any branches which may have been excluded in pursuance of paragraph of this Article, giving the reasons for such exclusion and describing the measures taken to give adequate protection to workers in excluded branches, and shall indicate in subsequent reports any progress towards wider application. Article . This Convention applies to all workers in the branches of economic activity covered. A Member ratifying this Convention may, after consultation at the earliest possible stage with the representative organisations of employers and workers concerned, exclude from its application, in part or in whole, limited categories of workers in respect of which there are particular difficulties. Each Member which ratifies this Convention shall list, in the first report on the application of the Convention submitted under Article of the Constitution of the International Labour Organisation, any limited categories of workers which may have been excluded in pursuance of paragraph of this Article, giving the reasons for such exclusion, and shall indicate in subsequent reports any progress towards wider application. Article For the purpose of this Convention a the term branches of economic activity covers all branches in which workers are employed, including the public service; b the term workers covers all employed persons, including public employees; c the term workplace covers all places where workers need to be or to go by reason of their work and which are under the direct or indirect control of the employer; d the term regulations covers all provisions given force of law by the competent authority or authorities; e the term health, in relation to work, indicates not merely the absence of disease or infirmity; it also includes the physical and mental elements affecting health which are directly related to safety and hygiene at work. PART II. PRINCIPLES OF NATIONAL POLICY Article . Each Member shall, in the light of national conditions and practice, and in consultation with the most representative organisations of employers and workers, formulate, implement and periodically review a coherent national policy on occupational safety, occupational health and the working environment. The aim of the policy shall be to prevent accidents and injury to health arising out of, linked with or occurring in the course of work, by minimising, so far as is reasonably practicable, the causes of hazards inherent in the working environment. Article The policy referred to in Article of this Convention shall take account of the following main spheres of action in so far as they affect occupational safety and health and the working environment: a design, testing, choice, substitution, installation, arrangement, use and maintenance of the material elements of work workplaces, working environment, tools, machinery and equipment, chemical, physical and biological substances and agents, work processes; b relationships between the material elements of work and the persons who carry out or supervise the work, and adaptation of machinery, equipment, working time, organisation of work and work processes to the physical and mental capacities of the workers; c training, including necessary further training, qualifications and motivations of persons involved, in one capacity or another, in the achievement of adequate levels of safety and health; d communication and cooperation at the levels of the working group and the undertaking and at all other appropriate levels up to and including the national level; e the protection of workers and their representatives from disciplinary measures as a result of actions properly taken by them in conformity with the policy referred to in Article of this Convention. Article The formulation of the policy referred to in Article of this Convention shall indicate the respective functions and responsibilities in respect of occupational safety and health and the working environment of public authorities, employers, workers and others, taking account both of the complementary character of such responsibilities and of national conditions and practice. Article The situation regarding occupational safety and health and the working environment shall be reviewed at appropriate intervals, either overall or in respect of particular areas, with a view to identifying major problems, evolving effective methods for dealing with them and priorities of action, and evaluating results. PART III. ACTION AT THE NATIONAL LEVEL Article Each Member shall, by laws or regulations or any other method consistent with national conditions and practice and in consultation with the representative organisations of employers and workers concerned, take such steps as may be necessary to give effect to Article of this Convention. Article . The enforcement of laws and regulations concerning occupational safety and health and the working environment shall be secured by an adequate and appropriate system of inspection. The enforcement system shall provide for adequate penalties for violations of the laws and regulations. Article Measures shall be taken to provide guidance to employers and workers so as to help them to comply with legal obligations. Article To give effect to the policy referred to in Article of this Convention, the competent authority or authorities shall ensure that the following functions are progressively carried out: a the determination, where the nature and degree of hazards so require, of conditions governing the design, construction and layout of undertakings, the commencement of their operations, major alterations affecting them and changes in their purposes, the safety of technical equipment used at work, as well as the application of procedures defined by the competent authorities; b the determination of work processes and of substances and agents the exposure to which is to be prohibited, limited or made subject to authorisation or control by the competent authority or authorities; health hazards due to the simultaneous exposure to several substances or agents shall be taken into consideration; c the establishment and application of procedures for the notification of occupational accidents and diseases, by employers and, when appropriate, insurance institutions and others directly concerned, and the production of annual statistics on occupational accidents and diseases; d the holding of inquiries, where cases of occupational accidents, occupational diseases or any other injuries to health which arise in the course of or in connection with work appear to reflect situations which are serious; e the publication, annually, of information on measures taken in pursuance of the policy referred to in Article of this Convention and on occupational accidents, occupational diseases and other injuries to health which arise in the course of or in connection with work; f the introduction or extension of systems, taking into account national conditions and possibilities, to examine chemical, physical and biological agents in respect of the risk to the health of workers. Article Measures shall be taken, in accordance with national law and practice, with a view to ensuring that those who design, manufacture, import, provide or transfer machinery, equipment or substances for occupational use a satisfy themselves that, so far as is reasonably practicable, the machinery, equipment or substance does not entail dangers for the safety and health of those using it correctly; b make available information concerning the correct installation and use of machinery and equipment and the correct use of substances, and information on hazards of machinery and equipment and dangerous properties of chemical substances and physical and biological agents or products, as well as instructions on how known hazards are to be avoided; c undertake studies and research or otherwise keep abreast of the scientific and technical knowledge necessary to comply with subparagraphs a and b of this Article. Article A worker who has removed himself from a work situation which he has reasonable justification to believe presents an imminent and serious danger to his life or health shall be protected from undue consequences in accordance with national conditions and practice. Article Measures shall be taken with a view to promoting in a manner appropriate to national conditions and practice, the inclusion of questions of occupational safety and health and the working environment at all levels of education and training, including higher technical, medical and professional education, in a manner meeting the training needs of all workers. Article . With a view to ensuring the coherence of the policy referred to in Article of this Convention and of measures for its application, each Member shall, after consultation at the earliest possible stage with the most representative organisations of employers and workers, and with other bodies as appropriate, make arrangements appropriate to national conditions and practice to ensure the necessary coordination between various authorities and bodies called upon to give effect to Parts II and III of this Convention. Whenever circumstances so require and national conditions and practice permit, these arrangements shall include the establishment of a central body. PART IV. ACTION AT THE LEVEL OF THE UNDERTAKING Article . Employers shall be required to ensure that, so far as is reasonably practicable, the workplaces, machinery, equipment and processes under their control are safe and without risk to health. Employers shall be required to ensure that, so far as is reasonably practicable, the chemical, physical and biological substances and agents under their control are without risk to health when the appropriate measures of protection are taken. Employers shall be required to provide, where necessary, adequate protective clothing and protective equipment to prevent, so far as is reasonably practicable, risk of accidents or of adverse effects on health. Article Whenever two or more undertakings engage in activities simultaneously at one workplace, they shall collaborate in applying the requirements of this Convention. Article Employers shall be required to provide, where necessary, for measures to deal with emergencies and accidents, including adequate firstaid arrangements. Article There shall be arrangements at the level of the undertaking under which a workers, in the course of performing their work, cooperate in the fulfilment by their employer of the obligations placed upon him; b representatives of workers in the undertaking cooperate with the employer in the field of occupational safety and health; c representatives of workers in an undertaking are given adequate information on measures taken by the employer to secure occupational safety and health and may consult their representative organisations about such information provided they do not disclose commercial secrets; d workers and their representatives in the undertaking are given appropriate training in occupational safety and health; e workers or their representatives and, as the case may be, their representative organisations in an undertaking, in accordance with national law and practice, are enabled to enquire into, and are consulted by the employer on, all aspects of occupational safety and health associated with their work; for this purpose technical advisers may, by mutual agreement, be brought in from outside the undertaking; f a worker reports forthwith to his immediate supervisor any situation which he has reasonable justification to believe presents an imminent and serious danger to his life or health; until the employer has taken remedial action, if necessary, the employer cannot require workers to return to a work situation where there is continuing imminent and serious danger to life or health. Article Cooperation between management and workers andor their representatives within the undertaking shall be an essential element of organisational and other measures taken in pursuance of Articles to of this Convention. Article Occupational safety and health measures shall not involve any expenditure for the workers. PART V. FINAL PROVISIONS Article This Convention does not revise any international labour Conventions or Recommendations. Article The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the International Labour Organisation whose ratifications have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve months after the date on which its ratification has been registered. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention at the expiration of each period of ten years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organisation of the registration of all ratifications and denunciations communicated to him by the Members of the Organisation. When notifying the Members of the Organisation of the registration of the second ratification communicated to him, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organisation to the date upon which the Convention will come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for registration in accordance with Article of the Charter of the United Nations full particulars of all ratifications and acts of denunciation registered by him in accordance with the provisions of the preceding Articles. Article At such times as it may consider necessary the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision in whole or in part. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention in whole or in part, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides: a the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force; b as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally authoritative.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organization, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its Ninetyfifth Session on May, Recognizing the global magnitude of occupational injuries, diseases and deaths, and the need for further action to reduce them, and Recalling that the protection of workers against sickness, disease and injury arising out of employment is among the objectives of the International Labour Organization as set out in its Constitution, and Recognizing that occupational injuries, diseases and deaths have a negative effect on productivity and on economic and social development, and Noting paragraph IIIg of the Declaration of Philadelphia, which provides that the International Labour Organization has the solemn obligation to further among the nations of the world programmes which will achieve adequate protection for the life and health of workers in all occupations, and Mindful of the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work and its FollowUp,, and Noting the Occupational Safety and Health Convention, No., the Occupational Safety and Health Recommendation, No., and other instruments of the International Labour Organization relevant to the promotional framework for occupational safety and health, and Recalling that the promotion of occupational safety and health is part of the International Labour Organization's agenda of decent work for all, and Recalling the Conclusions concerning ILO standardsrelated activities in the area of occupational safety and health a global strategy, adopted by the International Labour Conference at its st Session, in particular relating to ensuring that priority be given to occupational safety and health in national agendas, and Stressing the importance of the continuous promotion of a national preventative safety and health culture, and Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals with regard to occupational safety and health, which is the fourth item on the agenda of the session, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of an international Convention; adopts this fifteenth day of June of the year two thousand and six the following Convention, which may be cited as the Promotional Framework for Occupational Safety and Health Convention,. I. DEFINITIONS Article For the purpose of this Convention: a the term national policy refers to the national policy on occupational safety and health and the working environment developed in accordance with the principles of Article of the Occupational Safety and Health Convention, No. ; b the term national system for occupational safety and health or national system refers to the infrastructure which provides the main framework for implementing the national policy and national programmes on occupational safety and health; c the term national programme on occupational safety and health or national programme refers to any national programme that includes objectives to be achieved in a predetermined time frame, priorities and means of action formulated to improve occupational safety and health, and means to assess progress; d the term a national preventative safety and health culture refers to a culture in which the right to a safe and healthy working environment is respected at all levels, where government, employers and workers actively participate in securing a safe and healthy working environment through a system of defined rights, responsibilities and duties, and where the principle of prevention is accorded the highest priority. II. OBJECTIVE Article . Each Member which ratifies this Convention shall promote continuous improvement of occupational safety and health to prevent occupational injuries, diseases and deaths, by the development, in consultation with the most representative organizations of employers and workers, of a national policy, national system and national programme. Each Member shall take active steps towards achieving progressively a safe and healthy working environment through a national system and national programmes on occupational safety and health by taking into account the principles set out in instruments of the International Labour Organization ILO relevant to the promotional framework for occupational safety and health. Each Member, in consultation with the most representative organizations of employers and workers, shall periodically consider what measures could be taken to ratify relevant occupational safety and health Conventions of the ILO. III. NATIONAL POLICY Article . Each Member shall promote a safe and healthy working environment by formulating a national policy. Each Member shall promote and advance, at all relevant levels, the right of workers to a safe and healthy working environment. In formulating its national policy, each Member, in light of national conditions and practice and in consultation with the most representative organizations of employers and workers, shall promote basic principles such as assessing occupational risks or hazards; combating occupational risks or hazards at source; and developing a national preventative safety and health culture that includes information, consultation and training. IV. NATIONAL SYSTEM Article . Each Member shall establish, maintain, progressively develop and periodically review a national system for occupational safety and health, in consultation with the most representative organizations of employers and workers. The national system for occupational safety and health shall include among others: a laws and regulations, collective agreements where appropriate, and any other relevant instruments on occupational safety and health; b an authority or body, or authorities or bodies, responsible for occupational safety and health, designated in accordance with national law and practice; c mechanisms for ensuring compliance with national laws and regulations, including systems of inspection; and d arrangements to promote, at the level of the undertaking, cooperation between management, workers and their representatives as an essential element of workplacerelated prevention measures. The national system for occupational safety and health shall include, where appropriate: a a national tripartite advisory body, or bodies, addressing occupational safety and health issues; b information and advisory services on occupational safety and health; c the provision of occupational safety and health training; d occupational health services in accordance with national law and practice; e research on occupational safety and health; f a mechanism for the collection and analysis of data on occupational injuries and diseases, taking into account relevant ILO instruments; g provisions for collaboration with relevant insurance or social security schemes covering occupational injuries and diseases; and h support mechanisms for a progressive improvement of occupational safety and health conditions in microenterprises, in small and mediumsized enterprises and in the informal economy. V. NATIONAL PROGRAMME Article . Each Member shall formulate, implement, monitor, evaluate and periodically review a national programme on occupational safety and health in consultation with the most representative organizations of employers and workers. The national programme shall: a promote the development of a national preventative safety and health culture; b contribute to the protection of workers by eliminating or minimizing, so far as is reasonably practicable, workrelated hazards and risks, in accordance with national law and practice, in order to prevent occupational injuries, diseases and deaths and promote safety and health in the workplace; c be formulated and reviewed on the basis of analysis of the national situation regarding occupational safety and health, including analysis of the national system for occupational safety and health; d include objectives, targets and indicators of progress; and e be supported, where possible, by other complementary national programmes and plans which will assist in achieving progressively a safe and healthy working environment. The national programme shall be widely publicized and, to the extent possible, endorsed and launched by the highest national authorities. VI. FINAL PROVISIONS Article This Convention does not revise any international labour Conventions or Recommendations. Article The formal ratifications of this Convention shall be communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Article . This Convention shall be binding only upon those Members of the International Labour Organization whose ratifications have been registered with the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office. It shall come into force twelve months after the date on which the ratifications of two Members have been registered with the DirectorGeneral. Thereafter, this Convention shall come into force for any Member twelve months after the date on which its ratification is registered. Article . A Member which has ratified this Convention may denounce it after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the Convention first comes into force, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Such denunciation shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Each Member which has ratified this Convention and which does not, within the year following the expiration of the period of ten years mentioned in the preceding paragraph, exercise the right of denunciation provided for in this Article, will be bound for another period of ten years and, thereafter, may denounce this Convention within the first year of each new period of ten years under the terms provided for in this Article. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organization of the registration of all ratifications and denunciations that have been communicated by the Members of the Organization. When notifying the Members of the Organization of the registration of the second ratification that has been communicated, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organization to the date upon which the Convention will come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for registration in accordance with Article of the Charter of the United Nations full particulars of all ratifications and denunciations that have been registered. Article At such times as it may consider necessary, the Governing Body of the International Labour Office shall present to the General Conference a report on the working of this Convention and shall examine the desirability of placing on the agenda of the Conference the question of its revision. Article . Should the Conference adopt a new Convention revising this Convention, then, unless the new Convention otherwise provides: a the ratification by a Member of the new revising Convention shall ipso jure involve the immediate denunciation of this Convention, notwithstanding the provisions of Article above, if and when the new revising Convention shall have come into force; b as from the date when the new revising Convention comes into force, this Convention shall cease to be open to ratification by the Members. This Convention shall in any case remain in force in its actual form and content for those Members which have ratified it but have not ratified the revising Convention. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Convention are equally authoritative.Preamble The General Conference of the International Labour Organization, Having been convened at Geneva by the Governing Body of the International Labour Office, and having met in its rd Session on May, and Recognizing that the prohibition of forced or compulsory labour forms part of the body of fundamental rights, and that forced or compulsory labour violates the human rights and dignity of millions of women and men, girls and boys, contributes to the perpetuation of poverty and stands in the way of the achievement of decent work for all, and Recognizing the vital role played by the Forced Labour Convention, No., hereinafter referred to as the Convention, and the Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, No., in combating all forms of forced or compulsory labour, but that gaps in their implementation call for additional measures, and Recalling that the definition of forced or compulsory labour under Article of the Convention covers forced or compulsory labour in all its forms and manifestations and is applicable to all human beings without distinction, and Emphasizing the urgency of eliminating forced and compulsory labour in all its forms and manifestations, and Recalling the obligation of Members that have ratified the Convention to make forced or compulsory labour punishable as a penal offence, and to ensure that the penalties imposed by law are really adequate and are strictly enforced, and Noting that the transitional period provided for in the Convention has expired, and the provisions of Article, paragraphs and, and Articles to are no longer applicable, and Recognizing that the context and forms of forced or compulsory labour have changed and trafficking in persons for the purposes of forced or compulsory labour, which may involve sexual exploitation, is the subject of growing international concern and requires urgent action for its effective elimination, and Noting that there is an increased number of workers who are in forced or compulsory labour in the private economy, that certain sectors of the economy are particularly vulnerable, and that certain groups of workers have a higher risk of becoming victims of forced or compulsory labour, especially migrants, and Noting that the effective and sustained suppression of forced or compulsory labour contributes to ensuring fair competition among employers as well as protection for workers, and Recalling the relevant international labour standards, including, in particular, the Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to Organise Convention, No., the Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, No., the Equal Remuneration Convention, No., the Discrimination Employment and Occupation Convention, No., the Minimum Age Convention, No., the Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention, No., the Migration for Employment Convention Revised, No., the Migrant Workers Supplementary Provisions Convention, No., the Domestic Workers Convention, No., the Private Employment Agencies Convention, No., the Labour Inspection Convention, No., the Labour Inspection Agriculture Convention, No., as well as the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work, and the ILO Declaration on Social Justice for a Fair Globalization, and Noting other relevant international instruments, in particular the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the Slavery Convention, the Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, and the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, and Having decided upon the adoption of certain proposals to address gaps in implementation of the Convention, and reaffirmed that measures of prevention, protection, and remedies, such as compensation and rehabilitation, are necessary to achieve the effective and sustained suppression of forced or compulsory labour, pursuant to the fourth item on the agenda of the session, and Having determined that these proposals shall take the form of a Protocol to the Convention; adopts this eleventh day of June two thousand and fourteen the following Protocol, which may be cited as the Protocol of to the Forced Labour Convention,. Article . In giving effect to its obligations under the Convention to suppress forced or compulsory labour, each Member shall take effective measures to prevent and eliminate its use, to provide to victims protection and access to appropriate and effective remedies, such as compensation, and to sanction the perpetrators of forced or compulsory labour. Each Member shall develop a national policy and plan of action for the effective and sustained suppression of forced or compulsory labour in consultation with employers and workers organizations, which shall involve systematic action by the competent authorities and, as appropriate, in coordination with employers and workers organizations, as well as with other groups concerned. The definition of forced or compulsory labour contained in the Convention is reaffirmed, and therefore the measures referred to in this Protocol shall include specific action against trafficking in persons for the purposes of forced or compulsory labour. Article The measures to be taken for the prevention of forced or compulsory labour shall include: a educating and informing people, especially those considered to be particularly vulnerable, in order to prevent their becoming victims of forced or compulsory labour; b educating and informing employers, in order to prevent their becoming involved in forced or compulsory labour practices; c undertaking efforts to ensure that: i the coverage and enforcement of legislation relevant to the prevention of forced or compulsory labour, including labour law as appropriate, apply to all workers and all sectors of the economy; and ii labour inspection services and other services responsible for the implementation of this legislation are strengthened; d protecting persons, particularly migrant workers, from possible abusive and fraudulent practices during the recruitment and placement process; e supporting due diligence by both the public and private sectors to prevent and respond to risks of forced or compulsory labour; and f addressing the root causes and factors that heighten the risks of forced or compulsory labour. Article Each Member shall take effective measures for the identification, release, protection, recovery and rehabilitation of all victims of forced or compulsory labour, as well as the provision of other forms of assistance and support. Article . Each Member shall ensure that all victims of forced or compulsory labour, irrespective of their presence or legal status in the national territory, have access to appropriate and effective remedies, such as compensation. Each Member shall, in accordance with the basic principles of its legal system, take the necessary measures to ensure that competent authorities are entitled not to prosecute or impose penalties on victims of forced or compulsory labour for their involvement in unlawful activities which they have been compelled to commit as a direct consequence of being subjected to forced or compulsory labour. Article Members shall cooperate with each other to ensure the prevention and elimination of all forms of forced or compulsory labour. Article The measures taken to apply the provisions of this Protocol and of the Convention shall be determined by national laws or regulations or by the competent authority, after consultation with the organizations of employers and workers concerned. Article The transitional provisions of Article, paragraphs and, and Articles to of the Convention shall be deleted. Article . A Member may ratify this Protocol at the same time as or at any time after its ratification of the Convention, by communicating its formal ratification to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. The Protocol shall come into force twelve months after the date on which ratifications of two Members have been registered by the Director General. Thereafter, this Protocol shall come into force for a Member twelve months after the date on which its ratification is registered and the Convention shall be binding on the Member concerned with the addition of Articles to of this Protocol. Article . A Member which has ratified this Protocol may denounce it whenever the Convention is open to denunciation in accordance with its Article, by an act communicated to the DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office for registration. Denunciation of the Convention in accordance with its Articles or shall ipso jure involve the denunciation of this Protocol. Any denunciation in accordance with paragraphs or of this Article shall not take effect until one year after the date on which it is registered. Article . The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall notify all Members of the International Labour Organization of the registration of all ratifications, declarations and denunciations communicated by the Members of the Organization. When notifying the Members of the Organization of the registration of the second ratification, the DirectorGeneral shall draw the attention of the Members of the Organization to the date upon which the Protocol shall come into force. Article The DirectorGeneral of the International Labour Office shall communicate to the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations, for registration in accordance with article of the Charter of the United Nations, full particulars of all ratifications, declarations and denunciations registered by the DirectorGeneral. Article The English and French versions of the text of this Protocol are equally authoritative.